We have seen the second part of our lecture.
We have seen growth strategies.
And now we are moving to the third part of our lecture,
namely, to competitive strategies.
Dear colleagues, I would like to remind you
that today we are looking at business strategies
that are divided into three sub-types.
These are portfolio strategies, growth strategies and competitive strategies.
We have already discussed two sub-types.
These are portfolio strategies.
We have also discussed growth strategies.
I would like to remind you that we have discussed integration,
diversification,
leadership through either
deferences or differentiation and specialization.
Now we are moving to competitive strategies.
Competitive strategies determine
how to provide enterprises with competitive advantages on the market
in terms of attracting potential consumers
and what policy should be chosen by the company
in order to compete with competitors.
When we talk about competitive strategies,
we cannot but mention competitive advantages.
We have already discussed the acquisition of competitive advantages,
the specialization strategies,
differentiation strategies,
and the acquisition and reduction of costs.
Nevertheless, this is necessary in this block of strategies.
What are competitive advantages?
These are the characteristics of the company's market activity
that create a certain superiority over competitors
and allow to obtain the desired profit
and maintain a strong position on the market.
According to the general competitive matrix of the porter,
competitive advantages can be achieved
either through product leadership,
price leadership, or niche leadership.
As for product leadership,
we have already discussed that it can be achieved in different ways.
It can be either reduction of costs,
or achievement of differential advantage,
or concentration.
Price leadership is, most likely, reduction of costs.
And niche leadership is concentration of activity.
In this case, we are talking about the fact
that growth strategies that we have just discussed
and competitive strategies are interconnected.
One strategy flows into another.
In this case, it is very difficult to divide
the growth strategies between competitors.
Because when a company develops and grows,
it tries to achieve competitive advantage.
The general competitive matrix of the porter is presented as follows.
How can we achieve competitive advantage?
Reduction of costs, differential advantage,
price leadership, product leadership,
and niche leadership.
We will discuss each type of leadership.
Product leadership can be achieved
by differentiating, improving the product,
packaging, design, and so on.
Price leadership is a game with prices,
reduction of costs, standardization of quality,
and management of costs.
In this case, I would like to note
that the use of the law of experience and scale
should be used by companies.
Niche leadership is focusing on certain niches.
Niche is a part of the segment that has not yet been identified
and the needs of which have not yet been satisfied.
For example, the niche is a shampoo for oily hair.
Niche is a shampoo for oily hair.
This is the satisfaction of specific needs
that have not yet been satisfied.
As soon as they are satisfied,
the niche grows into segments.
The niche leadership is often used
by small business enterprises.
Large companies sometimes find it difficult
to segment their customers in a thorough way.
Even after a thorough segmentation,
large companies do not choose these segments
as their target markets, especially niches.
Small companies, realizing their competitive advantage,
choose niches or small segments as their target segments.
These are the segments that they pay close attention to
and work with.
The possible strategy for achieving
and maintaining competitive advantage
is represented in the matrix of competitive advantages.
We will present them in the table.
The table consists of three main graphs.
These are market positions,
the prevailing strategy and the passive strategy.
In the market positions,
companies can occupy three main positions.
These are the companies that pursue market leaders
and companies that avoid direct competition.
As Kotler says, the type of strategy chosen
depends on the position and share of the market
that the company occupies.
The company leader will be a large company
that occupies a leading position,
that conducts its marketing strategy aggressively
and that chooses large target segments
and works with them.
We will be interested in two other types of companies,
the companies that pursue or pursue market leaders
and the companies that avoid direct competition.
The companies that pursue market leaders
are those that realize that they cannot become market leaders,
but they use strategies similar to those of market leaders
or simply attack.
The companies that avoid direct competition
are, most likely, medium-sized or even small companies
that realize that due to their size
they cannot compete with a large company,
with a leader,
and they choose such a strategy
to avoid competition
and find niche segments and work with them.
The companies that pursue market leaders
are those that do not occupy a dominant position,
but can challenge such a leader.
The companies that avoid direct competition
are those that agree with their position on the market.
If we look at this table,
we will see that there are two types of strategies.
We see a persuasive strategy and a passive strategy.
The persuasive strategy is the strategy that companies use
to defend themselves,
to somehow bite the leader, so to speak.
And the passive strategy is the strategy
that simply follows the leader,
when small companies just go and use their position
without making any sudden movements,
just follow the course.
We see that the companies that pursue market leaders
use such persuasive strategies as attack, breakthrough and encirclement.
And the passive strategy is the course-following strategy.
And the companies that avoid direct competition
use such persuasive strategies as concentration on the site or bypass.
And the passive strategy is to keep their position.
We will look at these strategies
using the example of the stable strategy of small and medium-sized companies.
So we move on to the last section of our lecture
and talk about the stable strategy of small and medium-sized companies.
The Stable Strategy of Small and Medium-Sized Companies
First, let's define what small and medium-sized companies are.
What are these companies?
These are companies that occupy small or medium shares of the market.
They either cannot or do not even seek to take a leading position.
These are companies that either work in local markets or national markets
or in some narrow geographic markets
and do not seek to expand their positions.
But this does not mean that these companies do not have any weight
and do not occupy any positions.
Absolutely not.
They can even compete with the leaders
by providing some advantages to their competitors.
By their specialization.
Let's look at some strategies that small and medium-sized companies use.
We have already said that there are two types of strategies.
There is a persuasive strategy and a passive strategy.
The persuasive strategy of a company that is a leader-hunter
is a frontal attack.
The strategy is that the company uses the same means against its competitor
that the leader uses and tries to find weak spots.
In order to be successful, this frontal attack requires a significant superiority of the attacker.
In order to achieve superiority over the leader,
a certain ratio is necessary.
Usually, it is 3 to 1 in order to determine the competitor's advantage.
To be honest, I must say that a frontal attack is a rather risky strategy
because companies may not calculate their opportunities.
If they do not have this product-price superiority
or this superiority in distribution and this ratio of 3 to 1,
they may not achieve their goals and may not be able to defeat the leader.
I must say that many small companies tried to attack the leaders,
but they did not succeed.
Nevertheless, there are examples of successful use of this strategy.
For example, the ABM company, which was at its initial stage,
started its attack on the computer market in the 80s and 90s
and started to release their personal computers,
such as Apple, Commodore, Tandy and so on.
Nevertheless, this company was able to become a leader only after two years.
But this company was already a medium-sized company at that time.
Therefore, if we talk about medium and small companies,
they will hardly use this strategy.
It requires a lot of money and companies must use the strategy of leadership
by reducing costs, but this will not always lead to quality improvement.
Therefore, it is problematic.
Companies will reduce quality and thus reduce the price due to the reduction of costs,
but they may not achieve product leadership.
The next strategy is a breakthrough or a flank attack.
It involves the use of a weak side of the leader and finding a gap.
It can be aimed at a region or a household network,
where the dominant company is not represented as well as another company.
Or it can be aimed at a segment where the product of the leader is not well adapted.
The classic strategy is to challenge the market and reduce the price.
Again, this strategy involves the reduction of the leadership by reducing costs.
This strategy was used by many Japanese companies that entered the US car market.
But these companies were not small, they were large enough.
They entered the market with a basic model.
We talked about the Ansov matrix.
These were existing products for the new market.
They reduced the price for their basic models.
They took the leading position in relation to American cars,
because they were more economical and had better quality.
They were also sold at a lower price.
Japanese companies were good at developing their dealerships.
This allowed the companies to attack the market.
However, this strategy is not applicable to medium and small companies.
The third strategy is a circle.
This strategy is a gradual accumulation of advantages for the leader by studying his weak points and bypassing competitors from different sides.
This strategy is widely used by medium and small companies.
A good example is the Matryoshka chain of restaurants.
The direct competitor is the Yelki Palki chain of restaurants.
The Yelki Palki chain was established earlier than Matryoshka.
The advantage of this chain was that it was a network of inexpensive restaurants.
They were called taverns, and they served high-quality home-cooked food at low prices.
One of the advantages was the Swedish table.
However, Matryoshka, which was launched in 1996-1997,
gradually began to accumulate advantages over the leader.
What did they do?
First, they used the same strategy.
They followed the leader.
However, unlike Yelki Palki restaurants, where only one approach to the Swedish table was practiced,
Matryoshka started to practice a large number of approaches to the Swedish table.
They also expanded the range of dishes on the Swedish table.
At almost the same price, a person could have lunch and approach the Swedish table as many times as possible.
This is why Matryoshka used the environment and gradually began to push the Yelki Palki chain of restaurants.
We can see a local example of how Matryoshka pushed the Yelki Palki chain of restaurants.
There are two restaurants on the Tretikowska metro.
When Matryoshka restaurants became aggressive enough to enter the market,
Yelki Palki restaurant was forced to close the first floor.
The first floor was previously taken under the dining room and was re-based under the kitchen.
This is how Matryoshka gradually encircled the competitors and used their weaknesses and advantages.
The next strategy is to focus on the advantageous areas.
This is a choice of market segments that attract more competitive attention.
This strategy is used by small companies.
The next strategy is to avoid competition by releasing non-competitive goods,
services and services that are not attractive to the competitors of the Sbyt channel.
The examples of this strategy are the construction markets, such as the Kashersky Dvor, Strogino and many others,
which sell similar goods to the ABB, Leroy Merlin and others.
However, they are not competitive at lower prices.
For example, Strogino is quite close to Leroy Merlin.
Each company has its own activity.
Why does this happen?
Strogino sells goods using a completely different channel.
It does not provide services such as large ABB stores.
It does not use attractive channels of Sbyt.
Its selling points are not attractive.
However, it has its own customers who are ready to accept such inconveniences
and buy goods and construction materials at lower prices.
We have discussed the strategies that can be attributed to the advantages.
Now we will discuss passive strategies.
Passive strategies are strategies that involve adaptive behavior.
Companies decide to coordinate their actions, focusing on the leader.
They continue to flow.
They do not go against the flow.
They coexist peacefully with the leader, because they understand that they will not be able to compete with him.
Passive strategies are more typical of small businesses.
Such a strategy can be used in situations of oligopoly.
Or when companies understand that it is not profitable for them to compete with the leader.
This behavior does not mean that companies cannot have a competitive strategy.
On the contrary, small businesses and the ownership of a small share increase the importance of strategic moments
such as differentiation and giving the advantage to their competitors.
Small businesses do not necessarily become a dead weight.
They simply develop.
If you include them in the Boston Consulting matrix,
they have their own questions, stars, dogs and cows.
What can companies do to achieve competitive advantage?
First, effective use of OCR or research and development.
In other words, companies should invest a lot of money in research of their segment,
to improve the quality of the product, technology, reduction of costs, etc.
Next, creative segmentation.
In other words, companies should look for niches and use these advantages.
They should work with small clients and with segments that will not be of interest to large companies.
They should remain small.
This can also be an advantage.
Successful small firms can focus their attention on profit, not on sales.
They will strive for specialization and will not even try to increase their share of the market.
And, of course, strong leadership.
The influence of the leader is very important.
Because a strategy is formed, a general strategy is formed,
and the company leadership should give a report on where it wants to lead its company.
I must say that all these parameters are applied to many companies that work in the service sector.
For example, restaurant business, small hotels, companies that sell food, small companies, small stores, sewing, etc.
They all survive due to these aspects.
Passive strategy of following the leader does not imply passive behavior,
but rather the care of the leadership about the choice of strategy.
In this case, the leadership understands the place of the company,
and they develop their strategy and proceed smoothly, without crossing the path of the leader.
Because if they cross the path of the leader, they will be destroyed immediately.
We will consider several strategies that are quite typical for small and medium-sized firms.
The first is the course of the investigation.
The company that chooses this passive strategy of following the course
will minimize the risk of the leader's actions, that is, in price policy.
In other words, the company will not cross paths with the leader in price policy.
It will provide some services or goods at a lower price.
By the way, the quality of the services or goods provided may not be worse than that of the leader,
but it will not cross paths with the leader in this position.
For example, small car repair companies.
We have a lot of these companies, car service companies know this.
They prefer not to compete with official authorized car repair dealers,
but they provide a very wide range of services.
Of course, there will be both fragmented activity, narrow specialization,
and a fairly individual approach to the client.
For example, I can say that many people who have a good car,
nevertheless, prefer not to contact authorized dealers,
who have quite high prices.
Sometimes, if it is not a large enough repair,
they prefer to contact their already known car repair masters,
because they know that they will serve their cars in a high quality.
By the way, in this case, the law of experience will work very well here.
The next strategy is the strategy of preserving the position.
This passive strategy is aimed at maintaining the consistency in market activity,
without attracting the attention of competitors.
But if we look at the previous strategy, we will see that they are very similar.
In this case, if the previous strategy focuses on minimizing the risk of retaliatory actions,
mainly in price policy,
then here the company simply maintains the consistency of market activity,
and also, what is similar to this strategy, does not attract the attention of competitors.
What is this activity?
Small food and commodity stores, warehouses,
they do not want to compete with large and medium-sized companies,
not in terms of assortment, not in terms of logistics,
but most often they survive due to the fact that they are located near the house,
this is a convenient location, offices or stations, let's say,
and attract consumers with their price and low prices, and freshness of the product,
because very often this product is brought every day.
We have considered the main passive strategies and the prevailing strategies
that small and medium-sized companies use.
But I must say that in addition to this classification,
I would like to offer you another classification,
a rather interesting one, which represents the four main strategies.
If you look at this table, we will consider four main strategies.
The characteristics of the product of a small company and the form of existence of a small company.
There are four parameters.
A small company can exist independently of a large company,
or it is associated with a large company.
There are also two aspects in terms of the product characteristics.
Is it a product that is similar to a large company's product,
or is it a completely original product?
And we see four possibilities here.
A rather interesting strategy is the false mushroom strategy,
when a company, regardless of a large company,
produces a product similar to a large company's product.
Next is the chameleon,
this is a company that produces a product that is similar to a large company's product
and is associated with a large company.
It uses its advantages.
And two other strategies are the wise pebble strategy,
when a company produces an original product,
regardless of a large company.
Thus, it is abstracted and tries to flow.
And the last strategy is the stinging bee.
A company produces an original product, but it is associated with a large company.
This is a strategy of participation in the production of a product.
We will now look at these strategies in more detail.
The false mushroom strategy.
Small companies that survive on the market
produce so-called fake products.
Sometimes it happens legally, sometimes it is illegal.
Companies copy the products of large companies using the me-too product strategy.
If a company uses this strategy and, of course, registers its own product
and registers it under a different trademark than the product leader,
then this is quite a legal activity.
This is how many companies work.
If a company uses the me-too product strategy,
in other words, it simply uses fake products
and uses the power and strength of the product of the company leader,
then this is illegal.
Many Chinese products use the false mushroom strategy
and operate quite illegally on the market.
We all know, for example, the French BIC pens.
It is written B-I-C.
Many companies, unfortunately Chinese companies,
copy the products and write B-I-K, B-I-C, B-K, and so on.
And they produce pens.
Of course, they also use the strategy of achieving advantages by reducing costs, and so on.
The false mushroom strategy, however,
is independent, as you can see from the table, of other companies.
But, I must say, if we talk about the legal application of this strategy,
it can be applied only in those industries where the main manufacturers invest a lot in NEOCRE,
or Research and Development,
and receive at least 15% of the revenue
in relation to the information provided by the communication channels with the public and advertising.
For example, in this case,
we can see an example of a not very legal use of adidas.
The company Adomas capitalizes on the name adidas
and can create a little confusion in the consumer's mind, so to speak.
And people start to confuse the two names and buy the Adomas products.
I would like to say that this false mushroom strategy,
if it is used legally,
is used by many companies, and by very few companies.
They follow the leader,
they passively take and use the advantages of the leader's company.
That is, they take and use all the advantages of the leader
and, of course, hunt their consumers because they sell this product at a reduced price.
If the company uses this strategy quite illegally,
then it is already an illegal business.
And I repeat that, unfortunately, many companies in the gray market use this strategy.
The next strategy is the wise sandpaper strategy.
If you remember, this strategy refers to the fact that this is a company that produces an original product,
regardless of the large company.
When a company uses the wise sandpaper strategy,
it produces a completely original product that does not interact with the leader.
This strategy can be compared with the strategies that we have already considered,
such as following the course or maintaining a position.
That is, maintaining a position without attracting the attention of competitors.
We see here relative connections.
And with this strategy, the scale effect does not work.
If a company is engaged in the repair of something,
then it works on a limited market.
For example, if it is the repair of some watches and so on.
Basically, small companies that follow this strategy,
they are engaged in some individual activity
or work with a very narrow segment or even with some niche.
The next strategy is the beef.
This is a small company that creates an original product,
but unlike the previous strategy, its product is associated with the product of a large company.
This happens when a large company simply gives some small part of the work to a small company,
because it is simply not profitable for it to produce this product.
For example, a Toyota company that produces cars, parts, axles, engines, transmissions, driving parts.
It is simply not profitable for it to produce, for example, accompanying goods, such as covers or mats, and so on.
And it gives it to other companies for a refund.
In principle, such large companies can form a vertical marketing system,
an administered marketing system,
when a tender is announced, and small companies are happy to fight for
to work with a large company under its aegis.
Sometimes these are just the same terms of the contract,
when a company simply performs a certain activity for a large company,
and sometimes it turns into long-term cooperation.
That is, a company can work under the aegis,
although it has an independent name,
it can work with the authorship under the aegis of this large company.
The next strategy is the Chameleon strategy.
The strategy is that a small company creates a product similar to that of a large company,
but is associated with it by means of franchising.
If we talked about the first strategy, which is called a false flu,
I will remind you that I told you that in many cases this strategy is used by companies illegally,
but in this case, the company uses completely legal mechanisms.
A small company becomes a franchisee, in other words, it buys a license from a franchiser
and becomes part of this company.
Again, franchising is one of the forms of vertical marketing systems,
it is a contractual VMS,
so it is a very fast-growing form of promotion of companies to the new market,
and it must be said that it is really legal.
It must be said that 40-60% of the US franchising stores operate in the franchise system.
In this case, in Russia, franchising is developing very rapidly.
This is due to the fact that legislative documents and a legislative base have appeared,
which allowed companies to promote their products through franchising.
I will name such companies as large and small, which operate on the basis of franchising.
This is Kodak, this is McDonald's, but not in Russia,
this is the image of the Persona laboratory, this is franchising.
If we talk about Russia, then there are companies like Diana,
they work on franchising.
In other words, if you want to open your own business,
you can buy a license from a franchiser, become a franchisee,
complete a training course, you are supplied with equipment,
and you work under the aegis of this brand,
that is, you are part of this company,
but thus you definitely calculate some percentage for the franchiser according to the contract.
This is a very simple and, as I said,
very common model now, not only in the United States, but also in Russia.
In addition, as I have already listed, such examples as Diana,
I also think of the Coffee House company, which is also a franchising company,
Sweet Mama, which I mentioned,
there are a lot of companies that work under the aegis of franchising.
Thus, we have considered the strategies of medium and small firms,
and in this part of the lecture we focused on strategies that can be called
preemptive strategies, passive strategies,
as well as strategies that are associated with the characteristics of the product
and the form of the existence of a small firm.
False mushroom, wise pebble, chameleon and stingy bee.
Dear colleagues, our lecture is coming to an end.
I think this material will be useful to you.
Thank you again for your attention. Thank you. Goodbye.